---
layout: post
title: "How not to solve HackerRank problem"
date: 2022-03-16
---
1200 words

Taking a time to solve HackerRank problems is a great way to prepare for a job interview or school exams. Problems pose as stepping stones, starting at easy difficulty, through medium to hard, and then on to advanced or expert levels. A problem one chooses to solve is described, and input/output characteristics are given. If one does struggle, one can opt to enter discussion thread, where regularly solutions appear, study those first before entering one’s own solution, or choose to see editorial notes (in that case solution points do not count).

So it could be said that a precondition to a good solution is a detailed understanding of a given problem. There are usually hints indicating what structures could be used in problem solution, with links to complementary material. This is where I made my first mistake. Instead of following suggestions to some study text, I ignored it. The problem I was to solve is called Swap Nodes [Algo] (Kumar, n.d.), defined as a medium difficulty problem. In hindsight analysis, my decision stemmed from a false feeling of security and I must admit, arrogance (I assumed I could solve it in reasonable amount of time without any help input). Making several attempts, reading and re-reading the problem description, I realized my initial views were incorrect and that I could not provide a solution in a couple of hours. But instead of opting for a helping hand in the form of discussion thread I doubled down in my strong-headedness to find the solution on my own, barring any outside input. I did for a few moments revel in the cold shower of self-pity, having a blank look of a disillusioned student (the worst time for anyone to make decisions), being on the cross-roads of closing the laptop lid, walking away or doggedly carry on. I chose the second option. This was a second mistake, instead of calming down and reassessing the situation, I had to invest resources not meant to be applied to solving this problem.

Using known and well established data structures (DS) brings many benefits to problem solving. Not only it allows efficient time/space utilization, but also unloads from programmers’ shoulders the need to reinvent concepts (although one could argue fun is taken out of it). By ignoring suggested DSs I had to push my way through input data, understand its structure and define functions which would adapt it in ways appropriate for solution to be viable. This happened to be yet another mistake, as I chose an easy to understand structure (list of lists). From that point on it was an uphill struggle, as I had to find, adjust and define solutions appropriate for that structure. It nicely shows the two faces of problem solving – hard-to-understand structures could make problem solving easier while easy-to-understand (or implement) structures can set you on a path of uphill struggle.

Swap nodes [Algo] is a very nice problem. The input is a number of lines containing two integers signifying nodes in a binary tree. The required output involves in-order traversal of the nodes in the binary tree. However, there is a midway task of swapping nodes at given levels of the tree prior to output. Thus, the work could be separated into stages. First, build a tree. Second, swap nodes at given levels. Third, output nodes through in-order traversal.

I didn’t build a binary tree with the nodes given as input, instead, I built a structure (list of lists) modelling the tree by keeping nodes in lists, each list holding nodes found at a certain level of the tree. An example of input structure is given in the Figure 1:

{% include image.html url="/images/post2022-01-27/02_structure.png" description="Figure 1: A structure of nested lists is created as collisions occur. Here the length of lists decreases by 1 at each inner level." %}